From The New York Times, I'm [music]
Natalie Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> As the US bombardment of Iran has
escalated, it's become increasingly
clear [music]
just how much the US military has been
relying on sophisticated artificial
[music] intelligence. And that's made
the Defense Department's bitter fight
with the AI giant Anthropic over [music]
who controls that technology one of the
most high-stakes strategic battles
[music] of our time.
Today, my colleague Sheera Frenkel on
the standoff between the Trump
administration and Anthropic, and what
it really reveals about the future
[music] of warfare.
It's Monday, March 9th.
Sheera, it's wonderful to have you back
on The Daily.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> So, as this war in the Middle East has
progressed, we've been hearing more and
more about the US using AI in its
attacks on Iran. It's one of the first
times really where this technology is
very clearly having a practical
application for the US military. We are
seeing it in action. And at the same
time, in the background, there has been
this ongoing bubbling battle over the
use of that technology.
So, we're going to get into the
specifics of all of that, but first, can
you just lay out what this fight is
fundamentally about?
>> Well, this fight is so much bigger than
one company and this particular moment
with the Pentagon. It's really about the
future of warfare and the role that AI
is going to play in war. Right now, in
the Middle East, as the US looks for
targets to strike, it is using
Anthropic's technology to analyze
intelligence, analyze satellite imagery,
and figure out where it wants to hit. AI
can analyze data for the military faster
than a human being possibly could. It's
proving its worthiness every single day.
And so, in a sense, these private
technology companies based in Silicon
Valley and the Pentagon need each other
more than ever.
But there's a question about how they're
going to work together going forward.
>> Mhm.
>> We all hurdle towards this vision of
robot wars of, you know, AI-backed
weapons fighting AI-backed weapons.
They're trying to figure out who gets to
say what's safe and what's not. So, on
one side, you have these private Silicon
Valley companies. You have Anthropic,
which is the first AI company that was
authorized to work on classified US
military systems. You have OpenAI, which
is this behemoth of AI companies. You
have long-standing companies like Google
and Microsoft, which have AI divisions.
So, you really have a number of very
powerful companies in the Valley that
want to do business with the Pentagon
and are, in some cases, doing some
business with the Pentagon, figuring out
how to navigate that relationship.
And on the other side, you have the
Pentagon, which is thinking about this
global AI arms race against China, Iran,
and Russia, and how America is going to
fare in that.
>> And just to get a lay of the land here,
can you just explain how the Pentagon is
broadly making use of this technology,
what function it plays?
>> So, right now, AI plays a huge role in
what's called SIGINT, or signals
intelligence. What I mean by that is
that the military at any given time is
ingesting an incredible amount of data.
Text messages, postings on social media
pages, phone calls, all of this is
intelligence that's gathered by the
military and then used to make critical
decisions. Now, in the past, there was a
room full of human beings that would
have to sit there and analyze all this
intelligence.
But now, we have AI, and this is exactly
what AI is really good at. It ingests
data and then it tells you, "Here's an
important note you should take out of
this. Here's my summary. Here's one
phone call that's better than all the
other phone calls that you should
actually be listening to. And so, this
is critically important right now in the
Middle East where we're seeing this AI
technology being used. But, spinning
forward, it's only going to become more
important as AI gets better and better
and the military wants to integrate it
into more parts of its weapons arsenal.
>> Okay, so a hugely important debate
happening at a very important time. Just
orient us, Shira. How did this whole
fight start?
>> It actually starts in this very
positive, optimistic way in that the
Pentagon issues a call out last year
saying it wants to introduce AI. It
invites all these AI companies to
basically come into the military and
show them how they can be helpful. How
can the Pentagon, the Department of
Defense start integrating AI into its
own systems? And they immediately get a
lot of takers. You've got Silicon
Valley's biggest AI companies, Google,
xAI, Anthropic, and OpenAI, all raise
their hands and say we want to
participate, we want to work with the
Pentagon. And of all the AI companies
that begin working with the Pentagon,
Anthropic emerges as kind of the best
and the most seamlessly integrated into
the Pentagon systems. It's working with
Palantir, this data analytics company.
It's one of the only ones that is
approved to work on classified systems.
And so, people across the DoD tell us
that it really quickly became absolutely
fundamental to their work and made their
lives easier.
>> Okay, so I just want to pause here
because from what I know of Anthropic,
this is a company that brands itself as
the socially responsible AI company, the
company that emphasizes AI safety a lot.
And so, it's just kind of interesting to
me to hear that they were the first ones
to be so embedded within the US
military.
>> That's true.
This is a company that was founded by
people who left OpenAI because they
wanted a safer AI company. They said
they wanted more safeguards. I mean,
this is their entire premise and how
they draw employees to work there.
What they also are, however, is a
company that really believes in working
with the government. We've seen their
top executive say that they think AI can
make our country safer. It can help the
US military defend against adversaries.
They are, by all accounts, deeply
patriotic as well. And so, while the two
things don't seem to naturally go hand
in hand, I think in the minds of their
chief executives, at least from people
that are sitting in the room with them,
they say, "Yes, they wanted to work with
the government and they thought they
could be the ones to do it safely."
>> Okay, so that explains why at this point
in the story all sides are working well
together. When do things start to
change?
>> Things start to change on January 9th,
when the Secretary of Defense, Pete
Hoekstra, comes out with this pretty big
memo.
And he tells the military, he tells
everyone across Silicon [clears throat]
Valley that things are about to change.
AI is critical for the future of
warfare. China's developing AI weapons,
Russia's developing AI weapons. If the
US wants to be competitive, AI has to be
at the center of everything, from
autonomous weapons like drones or
fighter jets that have no pilots to data
systems.
And this kicks off a need for new
contracts with all the AI companies, and
they do what companies do. Their lawyers
[music] start sending contracts back and
forth with the Pentagon's lawyers trying
to figure out how they can come to some
sort of new agreement about this.
>> [music]
>> And how does that go?
>> They have differences, they have things
that they're trying to figure out, but
it's all sort of happening quietly
behind the scenes. When all of a sudden,
something happens that ends up
escalating tensions [music] between
Anthropic and the Pentagon.
[clears throat]
News reports emerge that Anthropic's
Claude technology was used as part of
the capture of Nicolas Maduro,
Venezuela's leader.
>> [music]
>> Right, I remember when that came out. It
was this surprising moment to find out
that an AI model was used to do
something like that. Like this very on
the ground operation that involved boots
on the ground and lots of planning, AI
was in the middle of it.
>> Yeah, I mean, I think it was even
surprising, confusing for people who
work at Anthropic who did not know if
their technology was used in the Majuro
raid. It even came up in a meeting that
happened between one employee at
Anthropic and another employee at
Palantir. The Anthropic guy asked, "Do
you know anything about this? You know,
is our technology being used?" It was
not something that they appeared aware
of.
But whether or not Anthropic's
technology was used at the Pentagon, the
fact that a private Silicon Valley
company would even be raising questions
about this was seen as inappropriate.
You had the Secretary of Defense Hagel
telling people around him that he didn't
like Anthropic even asking questions
about how their technology was being
used. And in the midst of all these kind
of sensitive negotiations happening
about the future of Anthropic and the
Pentagon, this was kind of the kindling
that they didn't need.
>> So, basically the Defense Department
sees this inquiry by this employee at
Anthropic as a sign that the company is
challenging the military's use of the
technology.
>> Yeah, exactly. They see it as a sign
that this private company that's talked
a lot about safety is going to try and
impose its own rules, its own
guardrails, its own ideas of safety onto
the Pentagon. And in the midst of all
these sensitive negotiations, it
suddenly becomes a crisis. It suddenly
spills over from emails back and forth
between lawyers to big public statements
by senior figures at the Pentagon.
>> And what is the crux of the crisis
itself?
>> The crux of the crisis is over Anthropic
wanting to define safety and wanting to
limit to specific ways in which the
Pentagon can use their technology.
They want it codified into their
contract with the Pentagon that their
technology will not be used for the mass
surveillance of Americans and it will
not be used for autonomous weapons.
>> And why has Anthropic drawn those red
lines on these uses of AI? Like, what's
the rationale here?
>> Well, they're worried about a few
different things here. First and
foremost, they're not sure that AI is
ready.
AI might have a 1% or 2% error rate, but
when it comes to something like picking
a target to hit with a missile, that
kind of error rate could mean life or
death.
>> Right, huge consequences.
>> Huge. Now, imagine, secondly, the PR
disaster. If a new story comes out that
Anthropic's AI was used to hit a target
that ended up being wrong. Suddenly,
this company has an absolute PR
nightmare on their hands, where
Americans are contending with this very
real-life use case where AI, or you
know, in science fiction books they
always say, "The robot, you know, it
chose the wrong target and humans were
killed."
And, you know, thirdly, they've got to
worry about their own employees. People
who work there are not comfortable with
working with the military. People who
work there are worried about the use of
AI in war. They really risk alienating a
lot of the people that they paid a lot
of money to come work at that company.
>> Right, it's worth saying that these
employees are very valuable, right?
There's a total talent war on to attract
these people, and you don't want to risk
losing them.
>> Yeah, that's right. They're some of the
most highly sought-after engineers
across Silicon Valley, and that's saying
a lot. We're talking about contracts
potentially worth tens of millions of
dollars to acquire some of these people.
>> Got it. So, it sounds like there is a
broad set of reasons why Anthropic is
not wanting to do this. What about the
Pentagon? What do they make of this?
>> The Pentagon is mad. They're sitting
there and saying, "Hey, you are a
private company. You do not get to make
these calls. Whoever decides that AI is
ready to control a weapon should be
sitting here, in the Pentagon, in the
military. We are the ones that make
these calls, and really, how dare you?"
is their view, as a private company try
to tell us how to build our weapon
systems.
>> They're saying it's not your role, it's
our role. That's our job.
>> Exactly.
And the Pentagon is saying, "We are
going to implement all lawful uses of
this technology. So they're making the
argument that Anthropic is really asking
for something that isn't necessary.
So things escalate and escalate and they
result in this meeting between the
Secretary of Defense Pete Hexeth and the
Chief Executive of Anthropic Dario
Amodei.
>> The CEO of one of the biggest AI
companies in the world is meeting with
Defense Secretary Pete Hexeth today as
the Pentagon threatens to essentially
blacklist that company Anthropic from
lucrative government contracts if the AI
company
>> for the most part until the very end.
>> Defense Secretary Pete Hexeth gave CEO
Dario Amodei until the end of the week
to sign a document ensuring the military
would have full access to the company's
AI model.
>> The secretary tells Dario Amodei, "Hey,
you have until Friday 5:00 p.m. Eastern
time to compromise. Work it out, figure
it out, but we are giving you a hard
deadline or we're going to take some
type of action against you."
>> [music]
>> And what is the action? What's the
threat?
>> So there's actually there's two threats
made against Anthropic and they're
pretty opposed to one another. One is
that Anthropic will be labeled a supply
chain risk and this is a a designation
that America has used in the past mostly
for foreign companies who produce
something abroad and which America feels
is not safe for national security
reasons for the government to be buying.
So they would be essentially saying,
"Hey Anthropic, we think you're
dangerous as a company for national
security and nobody in the government
can use you."
The other threat would see them invoke
this Defense Production Act which labels
a company so necessary to national
security that they have to work with the
federal government.
>> These seem like pretty extreme threats.
I mean the government is saying we're
either going to force Anthropic to
comply or inflict a ton of pain on this
company by punishing anybody else that
does business with them, essentially.
>> Yeah, I mean, they are extreme, and it
leads to this rare moment of solidarity
across Silicon Valley. These companies
who usually, I mean, quite honestly,
hate each other, suddenly come together,
and they say, "We stand behind
Anthropic. The AI community stands
behind Anthropic and their redlines."
And I think of all the voices that
emerged, the most interesting is Sam
Altman, who's the chief executive of
OpenAI. He historically has not gotten
along with Anthropic. These are a bunch
of guys that left his company and said
his company wasn't safe and started
their own company. There is no no love
lost between the leadership at OpenAI
and the leadership at Anthropic. And he
even stands up, and he says, "No, no, I
back them. I back Anthropic."
>> And here, we should just disclose for
transparency that The New York Times is
currently suing OpenAI over the use of
its models.
>> That's right. So, all of Friday, tension
is building. People [clears throat] are
tweeting in support of Anthropic.
They're telling the company to hold the
redlines. Anthropic's executives, their
lawyers, are on the phone. I mean,
minutes minutes before the deadline
hits, they're still on the phone with
the Pentagon trying to figure this all
out.
>> Mhm.
>> And then the deadline [music] happens.
14 minutes pass,
and two things quickly happen.
>> Now to major [music] development in the
clash between the US Department of
Defense and Anthropic, President Trump
has ordered the federal government to
stop using its technology after the AI
firm refused to lift guard.
>> One is that the DoD announces there is
>> [music]
>> no deal.
>> Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth says he
will designate Anthropic a supply
[music] chain risk to national security.
>> Anthropic is a supply chain risk. It's
going to [music] be booted, banned from
the entire federal government.
>> Saying any contractor that does business
with the US military will not be allowed
to conduct commercial activity with
Anthropic. [music]
>> President Trump called Anthropic a
radical left woke company which will not
dictate how the United States fights
[music] and wins wars. He accused
>> And then, they issue another surprise.
They actually have an ace in their back
pocket.
>> Anthropic's relationship appears [music]
to have ended, but OpenAI is ready to
make a deal.
>> This whole time, in the background,
they've been quietly negotiating [music]
directly with Sam Altman, the chief
executive of OpenAI.
>> Wow.
>> And this whole time, he's [music] been
negotiating himself directly with the
Pentagon. And Sam Altman says that he
got exactly the deal that Anthropic
wanted. But, he had actually [music]
decided to take a very different
approach to the entire negotiation.
>> We'll be right back.
Okay, Shira, you said that Sam Altman
took a much different tack with the
Pentagon in these negotiations. What do
you mean by that?
>> So, Anthropic had been asking this
entire time for certain things to be
codified into their contract. They
wanted established that their technology
cannot be used in these very specific
ways that were important to the company.
What Sam Altman did was say, "Hey, we
don't need that type of language into
the contract. What we're going to do is
write our own guardrails, our own safety
measures into the code itself."
Engineers call this writing into the
stacks, and it's something that AI
companies do all the time. They update
their safety measures, they quote write
into the stacks, guardrails that they
think are important. And so, he's
saying, "It's not on you, it's on us.
Whatever's important to us, whatever
safety measures we have as OpenAI, we
are going to make sure are there."
>> And just explain why that version of
things, where the company is in control
of writing these safeguards into the
models, why that wasn't good enough for
Anthropic.
>> People who work at Anthropic make the
argument that when you write something
into the stocks, it can be unwritten.
You can write something else the next
day. It is not permanent. These stocks
get changed daily. They could even be
changed hourly. And in their view, there
was not enough to stop the Pentagon from
saying, "Okay, well, you wrote that into
the stocks today, but tomorrow we're
telling you to do something else."
>> Essentially, you're saying their fear is
that this kind of guardrail is much more
movable. It's not permanent enough. It
doesn't guarantee that the limits will
be respected long-term.
>> Exactly.
>> So, the Pentagon came out of this
winning, it sounds like.
>> I mean, I think that from their point of
view, from the DOD folks we've talked
to, they are happy they got OpenAI on
board. I think that where the Pentagon
may run into problems long-term is the
broader AI community in Silicon Valley
and how this is really brought to the
forefront this bigger question of AI and
weapons, AI and the government. Is AI
going to be dangerous and is the
government thinking about it in a
responsible way? I think that whole
debate is now in the public
consciousness.
>> Right. And I have to imagine that the
extent to which this administration was
willing to really throw the book at this
American AI company, that has to have
had something of a chilling effect in
the industry, right?
>> Oh, definitely. I spoke to someone who
works at Google who said, "You know,
that's that's terrifying. If they can
threaten to label Anthropic a supply
chain risk or to use this Defense
Production Act against them, what's to
stop them from doing it to any tech
company in Silicon Valley if they don't
get their way?" And so, there's there's
been this moment of of trust building
between Silicon Valley and and the
Pentagon that's happened slowly over the
Trump administration, and we've really
seen a lot of that shattered in the last
week or so.
>> And what about the companies at the
center of this, Shira? Like, how do they
net out? Because obviously OpenAI has
this victory in terms of getting the
contract, but at the same time, it's
hard to ignore the PR benefits that have
come out of this for Anthropic. This
company was very popular among software
engineer types, but before all this, it
was by no means well-known among the
general public. And now, all of a
sudden, Anthropic is this topic of
national conversation.
>> Right. I mean, we saw that in the
immediate aftermath of all this,
Anthropic's Claude technology shoots to
the top of the App Store for the first
time in the company's history.
>> Mhm.
>> They have not just become a household
name, but they've become a household
name that's synonymous with security,
with safe AI. And that's a huge PR win
in a moment where so many people are
still afraid of AI.
>> Right. You're saying it's not just that
people are talking about the company,
it's that they're talking about it as a
company that values safety and
responsibility. And you can see why that
might be appealing.
>> That's right.
Out here in Silicon Valley, I think
Anthropic is really emerging as a winner
in terms of the PR battle for the hearts
and minds of engineers.
>> Mhm.
>> And right now, Anthropic is really being
seen as an ethical company that stood by
its guns and did what it said it was
going to do in terms of safety measures.
And here in Silicon Valley, engineers
are talking about how they want to go
work for them. And so, that could net
out really as a big win for Anthropic.
>> Mhm.
>> After Altman signed the deal, there was
a lot of blowback across Silicon Valley
for the terms that he had reached with
the Pentagon.
I actually saw people on the streets of
San Francisco holding up a sign saying
Anthropic stands strong.
>> Wow.
>> And you see online people who work at
these companies voicing both support for
Anthropic and dismay with OpenAI. And
that pushback from engineers has
complicated things for Sam Altman. He's
had to meet with his own employees more
than once to assure them that he's going
to seek a safe contract with the
Pentagon, and he's had to do a lot of
kind of internal PR work among people at
his company.
>> To try to do damage control, it sounds
like with his own employees.
>> Exactly. And we've seen him announce
subsequently that he may have made a
mistake rushing too quickly into a deal
with the Pentagon, and that he's
actually sought new language now around
the mass surveillance of Americans and
and other assurances so that his
employees will not be as upset as they
have been in the last few days about
this contract with the Pentagon. So,
where this stands now is that you have
two of Silicon Valley's largest
companies basically battling it out over
what safe AI looks like. On one hand,
you have Sam Altman, OpenAI, and his
version of working with the Pentagon.
And on the other, you have Dario Amodei
and Anthropic sort of saying this is how
we think safe AI should play out.
>> And Chiara, through all this, it's clear
that both companies are trying to win
the optics battle in all of this. Both
are claiming the mantle of safety,
asserting or reassuring people, their
own employees, that that's what they
care about. But, I just want to push on
what they actually mean by that, by
safety. Because when we were talking
earlier about the red lines, Anthropic
insisting that its model shouldn't be
used for mass surveillance or autonomous
weapons, they were saying their models
just aren't ready yet. They're still
error-prone.
And so, it sounds like they're arguing
it's not safe to use their model in
those ways now.
But, do you think these companies are
opposed to those models being used for
mass surveillance, for autonomous
weapons, ever?
>> No, I I think ultimately these companies
are well aware that the way the world is
headed is that AI is going to be at the
center of pretty much everything the
government does from surveillance to the
weapon systems. AI is going to play a
role.
>> Right.
>> You also have to remember these these
companies are really competitive.
They're technologists who love what they
do. They love the future of AI. And so
there's also sort of a personal vested
interest in making the AI good enough to
play this really central role across the
government.
>> Right. I mean and there's billions at
stake we should say in this industry
being invested. These companies are
locked into competition with each other
and there's no going back is what you're
saying.
>> There is no going back. When you speak
to some of these technologists they
describe what the world looks like in
the future and honestly depending how
much sci-fi you've read in your life
that is a very attractive vision or a
really scary vision of the future. So
they look forward and they imagine a war
in which there's no human soldier on the
battlefield where back in Washington or
wherever on some military base there's a
guy with a headset who's controlling a
fleet of drones or submarines or
fighterless jets and they're fighting
against another nation state which has
very much the same
the surveillance of all these targets is
happening through AI systems that can
comb through imagery faster than the
human brain can process a single
photograph and all these decisions are
happening at lightning speeds.
That's what they see all of us kind of
hurtling towards.
>> What you're saying is this fight that
we've been describing between Anthropic
and the Pentagon and OpenAI
it didn't actually forestall the future.
In some ways it just made clear to
everyone that it's coming.
>> That's right.
They are all clear that it's inevitable
and what all these companies agree on
what the Pentagon agrees on is that
they're all active partners in making
this a reality.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Shira,
thank you so much.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
Iran has named a new supreme leader,
Mojtaba Khamenei.
Khamenei is the 56-year-old son of the
recently killed supreme leader, and his
appointment [music] signals the
government's desire for continuity.
Khamenei has been coordinating military
and intelligence operations at his
father's office, and [music] he has very
close ties to the powerful Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps.
President Trump has called the younger
Khamenei an unacceptable [music]
choice.
Before the announcement, Trump told ABC
that whoever is selected as Iran's next
leader [music] is, quote, "not going to
last long without the approval of the
United States."
And
over the weekend, the US and Israel
intensified their attacks on Iranian
military targets and vital energy
infrastructure. Israeli warplanes bombed
several fuel depots in and around
Tehran, saying they were being used by
Iran's military.
The airstrikes [music] created an
apocalyptic scene in the capital,
setting off oil fires that turned the
horizon orange and blanketed the city
with dark oily smoke.
Water desalination [music]
plants were also struck in Iran and on
the Persian Gulf island [music] of
Bahrain, threatening to further disrupt
the lives of millions in the region
>> [music]
>> who depend on desalination for drinking
water.
Finally, [music] on Sunday evening, oil
prices surged to over $100 a barrel for
the first time in 4 years, a worrying
sign about the war's potential effect on
gas prices.
Trump said in a truth social post on
Sunday that higher [music] oil prices
would be short-lived and called them a
quote very small price to pay [music]
for peace.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Ricky Nuvetcky, Rochelle Bonja, Diana
Wynn, Eric [music] Krupke, and Michael
Simon Johnson with help from Mary
Wilson.
>> [music]
>> It was edited by Mark George and Lisa
Chow. Contains music by Marion Lozano,
Rowan Nimasdo, [music] and Dan Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.